\hypertarget{introduction}{%
  \chapter{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

\hypertarget{motivation}{%
  \section{Motivation}\label{motivation}}

\hypertarget{impact-of-the-nearshore-data}{%
  \subsubsection{Impact of the nearshore
    data}\label{impact-of-the-nearshore-data}}

One of the most important aspects of a 1D wave model is the nearshore
bathymetry, since the exact shape and depth of the profile has a
profound impact on the wave transformation. The current state of 1D
modeling of mangrove ecosystems either relies on in-situ survey data, or
on a assumed profile shape. Currently, there exists a world-wide
bathymetric dataset (GEBCO), but the resolution of 1km, and the rounding
of depths to the nearest meter make this data insufficient for accurate
modeling of the nearshore zone.

\hypertarget{limitations-of-conventional-nearshore-survey}{%
  \subsubsection{Limitations of conventional nearshore
    survey}\label{limitations-of-conventional-nearshore-survey}}

The nearshore zone is a very difficult environment to perform
bathymetric surveying. \cite{Parrish2019}. Existing methods of
bathymetric survey, like a multi-beam echo sounder (MBES) are typically
attached to ships which cannot navigate in water shallower than 4-5m,
and are limited by operational restrictions when working in shallow
water, like the precense of navigational hazards or sensitive
ecosystems. Airborne lidar surveying can be used for a high resolution
model of the bathymetry. However, these surveys are extremely expensive
to perform and require extensive post-processing effort to create a
usable surface model.

\hypertarget{identified-knowledge-gaps}{%
  \section{Identified Knowledge gaps}\label{identified-knowledge-gaps}}

\hypertarget{research-question}{%
  \section{Research Question}\label{research-question}}


\begin{itemize}
  \item
        How can spaceborne lidar data be used to improve existing nearshore
        bathymetry and canopy height data along mangrove-lined coasts?
\end{itemize}

To answer this question, the following subquestions will be pursued:

\begin{itemize}
  \item
        How can ICESat-2 transects with reliable data be identified
        algorithmically?
  \item
        How can lidar returns reflecting the seafloor be separated from
        background noise?
  \item
        How can gaps be filled in areas with missing lidar photons?
  \item
        Once signal photons have been identified, how can the seafloor
        elevation data be extracted?
  \item
        Can information about the mangrove canopy height be extracted from the
        lidar data?
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{literature-review}{%
  \chapter{Literature Review}\label{literature-review}}

\hypertarget{lidar-bathymetric-survey}{%
  \section{lidar bathymetric survey}\label{lidar-bathymetric-survey}}

The earliest attempts to use Light Detecting and Ranging (lidar) to survey the coastal zone date back to the late 1960s. \cite{Bailly2016}.

\begin{itemize}
  \item
        1064 and 1550nm lasers are preferred for topographic lidar
  \item
        532nm laser better for bathymetric lidar
  \item
        photon-counting lidar allow low power consumption, so they are more
        practical from a satellite
  \item
        in waveform-resolving lidar, each point return is a pulse containing
        thousands of photons
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{mangroves-as-coastal-protection}{%
  \subsection{Mangroves as coastal
    protection}\label{mangroves-as-coastal-protection}}

Sea level rise poses a threat to all coastal communities, including many
of the world's largest population centers. The risk is even more
existential for low-lying tropical communities, who have done little to
contribute to the current climate crisis, but are disproportionately
affected by the sea level rise. Low-lying nations often do not have any
available high ground to move cities to, and sometimes do not have
access to the resources to fully mitigate these risks through hard
infrastrcture. For these reasons, mangroves forests are an important
resource for these communities, providing coastal protection that can
adapt to sea level rise by trapping sediment and expanding outward if
conditions permit.

Current study of the effects of mangroves on wave attenuation are
limited by the difficulty of gathering data about these ecosystems.
Shallow water bathymetry and mangrove height are difficult to survey
manually. Mangrove forests are extremely dense and field work is
difficult. Therefore, finding an automated way of extracting this
anywhere in the world from and publicly available data is a massive
improvement when modeling sites that do not have existing survey data.

\hypertarget{icesat-2}{%
  \section{ICESat-2}\label{icesat-2}}

The ICESat-2 mission is intended to gather high resolution topographic
data on a global scale. The satellite carries the Advanced Topographic
Laser Altimeter System (ATLAS). ATLAS is a highly sensitive
photon-counting, green-light lidar. The satellite instrument points at
reference ground tracks (RGT) along the earth's surface with a repeat
time of 91 days. Along the reference track, there are 3 beams, one
pointing directly at the reference track, and two that are offset by
approximately 3km on either side.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./figures/ATLAS_beam_layout_from_user_guide.png}
  \caption{RBTref}
\end{figure}

Each of the 3 beams emits both a strong and weak beam, with the strong
beam being approximately 4x more powerful \cite{Neumann2019d}. Of the
approximately \(10^14\) of photons emitted per pulse, up to
approximately 10 make it back to the sensor and are detected.
\cite{Neumann2019d}. The exact number of emitted photons that
subsequently detected at the sensor depends on the local atmospheric
conditions and the reflectivity of the surface \cite{Neumann2019e}.

\includegraphics{./figures/3d_beam_view_from_atl03ATBD.png}\cite{Neumann2019d}

The main mission of the satellite is to gather data about mass and
elevation changes in ice sheets and glaciers, and to study global canopy
height \cite{Markus2017}. In support of the global vegetation height
mission, the observatory is pointed away from the reference ground
tracks when flying over land, to increase the spatial density of the
observations of vegetation height \cite{Markus2017}. The off
pointing begins before the satellite begins to record data over land, so
the nearshore coastal area is also included, and therefore bathymetyric
and hydrological applications also benefit from increased spatial
coverage \cite{Magruder2021}.

To locate the position of each photon in 3D space, the time of flight of
the photon is calculated with a precision of 800 ps
\cite{Neumann2019d}. The location of the center of mass of the
instrument is found using Global Positioning System (GPS) systems on
board the satellite. By combining the measured time of flight and
satellite position, the geolocation of the photon can be estimated with
high accuracy \cite{Neumann2019d}.

The photon geolocation data is distributed by NASA as the ATL03 data
product{[}{]}

\hypertarget{weak-vs.-strong-beams}{%
  \subsection{Weak Vs. Strong Beams}\label{weak-vs.-strong-beams}}

The beams are divided into weak and strong signals to enhance the
radiometric dynamic range. The strong beams are expected to provide
better signal-noise ratios over low-reflectively surfaces.
\cite{Neumann2019d} Therefore, these beams are expected to provide
the best data for radiometric bathymetry measurements.

\hypertarget{refraction-correction}{%
  \subsection{Refraction correction}\label{refraction-correction}}

\hypertarget{vertical-reference-systems}{%
  \subsubsection{Vertical Reference
    Systems}\label{vertical-reference-systems}}

The ATL03 data product reports the photon heights relative to the WGS84
reference ellipsoid. These ellipsoidal heights already include
corrections for: - The solid earth tides - Ocean loading - Ocean Pole
tide - Wet and dry atmospheric delays

The height provided in ATL03 is calculated by the following equation:

\[H_{GC} =  H_{P} - H_{OPT} - H_{OL} - H_{SEPT} - H_{SET} - H_{TCA}\]

Where:

\begin{itemize}

  \item
        \(H_{GC}\) is the geophysically corrected photon height above the
        WGS84 ellipsoid
  \item
        \(H_{P}\) is the raw photon height above the WGS84 ellipsoid
  \item
        \(H_{OPT}\) is the height of the Ocean Pole tide
  \item
        \(H_{OL}\) is the height of the ocean load tide
  \item
        \(H_{SEPT}\) is the height of the solid earth pole \textbf{tide}
  \item
        \(H_{SET}\) is the solid earth tide
  \item
        \(H_{TCA}\) is the height of the total column atmospheric delay
\end{itemize}

Included in the data are the height of the tide-free geoid, the height
difference between the tide-free and mean-tide geoid, and the height of
the tide relative to the mean tide geoid as calculated by the GOT4.8
model. This GOT4.8 model tidal height is a based on a low resolution
model, and therefore is less accurate in nearshore coastal areas and
within embayments \cite{Neumann2019e}.

\hypertarget{signal-photon-identification}{%
  \subsubsection{Signal Photon
    Identification}\label{signal-photon-identification}}

The ATL03 data product includes a calculated confidence that a given
photon return is signal or noise, for each surface type. This is a rough
estimate, but is reliable for detecting ocean surface photons. However,
many photons classified as noise by this included algorithm appear to
represent bathymetric returns. Therefore, to calculate the bathymetry,
all photon returns, including those classified as noise by the ATL03
signal/noise algorithm are filtered to remove points that are too high
or low to be considered bathymetric returns. Then, a seperate algorithm
specifically calibrated to distinguish bathymetric signal from noise
photons is applied to this data.

\hypertarget{satellite-derived-bathymetry}{%
  \subsection{Satellite Derived
    bathymetry}\label{satellite-derived-bathymetry}}

\hypertarget{multispectral-imagery}{%
  \subsection{Multispectral imagery}\label{multispectral-imagery}}

There are many techniques to approximate depth by the spectral
signatures of optical satellite data. The two classical ones are the
band-ratio model and the linear band model. they work well in optically
shallow waters (cite).

\hypertarget{machine-learning-methods-for-optical-imagery}{%
  \subsubsection{Machine learning methods for Optical
    Imagery}\label{machine-learning-methods-for-optical-imagery}}

\begin{itemize}

  \item
        from {[}{]}
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{lidar-bathymetry}{%
  \section{lidar bathymetry}\label{lidar-bathymetry}}

Green light lasers can penetrate the water up to a certain depth based
on the local water clarity. In very clear water depth detection of up to
40m has been achieved from spaceborne lasers \cite{Parrish2019}. The
laser path has to be corrected for refraction induced by the water
before the bathymetry can be reliably estimated.

\hypertarget{active-passive-sensor-fusion-the-best-of-both-worlds}{%
  \subsection{Active-passive Sensor fusion: The best of both
    worlds}\label{active-passive-sensor-fusion-the-best-of-both-worlds}}

The potential for bathymetric mapping using spaceborne laser
observations has been known since before the advent of the IceSAT-2
mission. The predecessor mission carried a lidar instrument called the
Geoscience Laser Altimeter System (GLAS). While GLAS was a green-light
laser, it was intended for measuring atmospheric aerosols {[}ref 14
cited by@Forfinski2016{]}. However, because of the laser architecture,
GLAS was not able to penetrate the water column
\cite{Forfinski-Sarkozi2016}.

However, a prototype of ATLAS, called the Multiple Altimeter Beam
Experimental lidar (MABEL) instrument was tested with high-altitude
aircraft missions, allowing a simulation of the data that would be
transmitted by ATLAS. Early experiments with MABEL showed good agreement
between bathymetry measured with MABEL and high-quality airborne
reference data \cite{Jasinski2016,Forfinski-Sarkozi2016}.

Since the IceSAT-2 satellite launched in 2018, there have been several
studies that evaluate the data for bathymetric mapping purposes, and
experiment with different techniques to distinguish signal from noise.
One of the earliest and most cited is Parrish et al.~(2019)
\cite{Parrish2019}. The paper addresses refraction correction by
manually segmenting bathymetric signal points, estimating the water
surface based on photons returns classified as water surface, using the
provided angle of incidence of the satellite.

The Parrish paper includes correction for both horizontal and vertical
effects of refraction. Most of the time, the instrument is pointed
directly down at the RGT, so the laser beams are near the nadir. When
directly on-nadir, the horizontal error induced by refraction is
approximately 9cm \cite{Parrish2019}, which for bathymetric purposes
is negligible.

However, by design ATLAS can point up to (5 degrees ) off-nadir (up to
43km away from the RGT) \cite{Magruder2021}. The off-nadir pointing
mode is used over land to increase the density of tracks in the
mid-latitudes. This allows better coverage of the vegetation canopy
height and coasts at the mid-latitudes. When pointing off-nadir, the
horizontal error is much more significant and must be corrected for
accurate bathymetry. In all of these calculations, the water surface is
assumed to be flat.

Parrish et al.~test their technique in 4 different regions: St.~Thomas,
Turks and Caicos, North West Australia, and the Great Bahama Bank. In
the Parrish paper, they suggest that the best use of lidar data for
bathymetry is to combine it with optical/multispectral techniques.
Because the lidar-derived data provides highly accurate point estimates
along a certain track, and the multispectral approach allows the
estimation for a 2D area, combining the two techniques provides a
synergistic fusion of the strengths of both. The lidar-derived depths
are used as training data for the multispectral models allowing an
accurate 2d picture of the bathymetry.

Further studies have implemented the combination of multispectral SDB
that is calibrated using satellite data. This technique has shown
promising results.

\hypertarget{summary-of-prior-studies-of-photon-counting-lidar-bathymetry-extraction}{%
  \subsubsection{Summary of Prior studies of Photon-counting lidar
    bathymetry
    extraction}\label{summary-of-prior-studies-of-photon-counting-lidar-bathymetry-extraction}}

\begin{landscape}
\begin{table}
  \label{SDB-research-summary}
  \caption{Summary of SDB resarch that combines spaceborne lidar and optical data}
  \centering
  \begin{tabular}{lllllll}
    \midrule
    Author                  & Year & Dataset & Refraction Correction Method  & S/N Classification method & Tide Correction & Notes                    \\
    Forfinski-Sarkozy et al & 2016 & MABEL   & First-order depth correction  & Manual                    & N/A             & non-tidal                \\
    Jasinski et al.         & 2016 & MABEL   &                               &                           & N/A             & Looked at lakes          \\
    Parrish et al.          & 2019 & ATLAS   & Parrish method                & Manual                    & N/A             & used  ellipsoidal height \\
    Liu et al               & 2021 & ATL03   &                               &                           & TMD tidal model & -                        \\
    Ma et al.               & 2020 & ATL03   & Parrish + sloping sea surface & Adaptive  DBSCAN          & OTPS2           & -                        \\
    Xie et al.              & 2021 & ATL03   & Parrish method                & Adaptive DBSCAN           &                 & DBSCAN  is used twice    \\
    Thomas et al.           & 2020 & ATL03   &                               &                           &                 & -                        \\
    Albright and Glennie    & 2021 & ATL03   & First-order                   & Manual                    & N/A             & Converted to NAD83       \\
    Cao et al.              & 2021 & ATL03   & First-order depth correction  & A-DRAGANN                 &                 &                          \\
    Lee et al.              & 2021 & ATL03   &                               &                           &                 & -                        \\
    Le Quilleuc et al.      & 2022 & ATL03   & Parrish                       &                           &                 & -                        \\
    Xu et al.               & 2021 & ATL03   &                               &                           &                 & -                        \\
    \bottomrule
  \end{tabular}
\end{table}
\end{landscape}
% \end{sidewaystable}


\hypertarget{proposed-methodology}{%
  \chapter{Proposed Methodology}\label{proposed-methodology}}

To extract the nearshore bathymetry:

\hypertarget{find-areas-for-global-analysis}{%
  \subsection{Find areas for global
    analysis:}\label{find-areas-for-global-analysis}}

\hypertarget{refine-signalnoise-classification-algorithm}{%
  \subsection{Refine Signal/noise classification
    algorithm}\label{refine-signalnoise-classification-algorithm}}

\hypertarget{downloading-and-processing-data}{%
  \subsection{Downloading and processing
    data:}\label{downloading-and-processing-data}}

\begin{itemize}

  \item
        Get GEBCO and icesat for each study area
  \item
        extract ICESAT ground tracks lines
  \item
        throw out any lines that don't intersect the OSM Coastline
  \item
        determine which transect direction is offshore (based on deepest GEBCO
        depth?)
  \item
        Go from offshore side to the OSM coastline intersection and resample
        the GEBCO depth to desired horizontal resolution
  \item
        calculate along-track distance
  \item
        Find distance in meters by reprojecting to local UTM, starting from
        offshore side of transect
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{classify-lidar-photon-returns-for-each-quality-transect}{%
  \subsection{Classify lidar photon returns for each quality
    transect}\label{classify-lidar-photon-returns-for-each-quality-transect}}

\begin{itemize}

  \item
        Interpolate GEBCO data along the transect (contour raster, build 30m
        TIN off the contours?)
  \item
        Extract bathymetry using correction algorithm
  \item
        Extract canopy height from canopy height data
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{assess-seafloor-bathymetry}{%
  \subsection{assess seafloor
    bathymetry}\label{assess-seafloor-bathymetry}}

\begin{itemize}

  \item
        Bayesian updating of interpolated GEBCO data
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{analysis-and-statistical-evaluation}{%
  \subsection{Analysis and statistical
    evaluation}\label{analysis-and-statistical-evaluation}}

\begin{itemize}

  \item
        Find areas where the technique is applicable
  \item
        study the resulting transects
\end{itemize}

\hypertarget{proposed-method-flowchart}{%
  \section{Proposed Method Flowchart}\label{proposed-method-flowchart}}

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./figures/approach.png}
  \caption{image}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{practicalities}{%
  \chapter{Practicalities}\label{practicalities}}

\hypertarget{planned-schedule}{%
  \section{Planned Schedule}\label{planned-schedule}}

The planned schedule is shown below.

\begin{figure}
  \centering
  \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./figures/thesis-schedule.png}
  \caption{Schedule}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{planned-final-document-outline}{%
  \subsection{Planned final document
    outline}\label{planned-final-document-outline}}
